Once around
Myra. Myra Omron Setetti is in the
constellation of the whale and not a
particularly bright star at its best,
but it is a variable and it's been known
since antiquity to have this very weird
behavior. Hence the name Myra, as in
miracle, meaning wonderful or
astonishing.
Distance-wise, it's probably around 300
lighty years. Some estimates prehyparos
give much lower figures, but we seem to
be settling on around 299 is the correct
answer these days in terms of distance
from the sun.
But the main feature of it is that it's
a binary star composed of component A, a
very late stage AGB star, an asimtotic
giant branch star, 20% more massive than
the sun, but about 300 times the sun's
radius. So truly enormous. It would uh
swallow up the inner part of the solar
system in its outer envelope. And that
envelope is relatively cool. It's
somewhere between 2,900 and
3,200 Kelvin. Um, that's very cold
indeed. It's barely red hot. And it
varies in color from a deep red up to a
slightly warmer orange color as it
pulsates. And we'll look at the
pulsations in a moment. There's also the
B star, which is a white dwarf, and
we'll come to that last. But the
variations have been known since
antiquity. Really first documented by
Fabrichius in 1596. But we think the
Chinese, Babylonians, and Greeks were
all over the strange behavior of this
star.
And it's probably the first truly
variable star to be identified that
wasn't a supernova with the possible
exception of the eclipsing binary star
Alol that varies in brightness but
that's because we ultimately can see two
stars or only one rather than the star
itself changing brightness.
So it was recorded in the 1600s by uh
various astronomers including Johannes
Hulwada that the
star resurged in brightness in this
11month
pattern going from invisible magnitude 9
all the way up to a reasonably bright
magnitude 3. And the modern period for
that agrees at about 332 days. But we
think this varies a little bit and may
indeed be slowly changing. Now you see
the light curve on the right hand side
there and these are characteristic of a
whole class of what are now called myra
variables. So what's going on inside
this uh rather evolved late stage AGB
star is that it is pulsating in
brightness. It's goes from being a
relatively compact small size during the
time when it is at its brightest. It's
smaller and hotter and giving off lots
of visible light that we can see
well through the outer atmosphere which
is fairly transparent at this stage. So
we see the visible light coming directly
to us and the star
brightly.
But as the pulsation occurs, the star
swells up and
cools, dropping the the uh outer
temperature from
3,200 down to
2,900. A lot of the visible light
therefore goes away and becomes infrared
light. It's still visible, but uh
nowhere near as much. But crucially, the
outer atmosphere of the star becomes
cooler and cold enough that metal oxides
can form as dust. So there are things
like titanium oxide and oxides of other
metals
that condense out as individual
molecules and dusty grains. And this
dust blocks that visible light even
further. it picks it up, warms up, turns
into infrared radiation. So the whole
thing is still glowing away in the
infrared, but of course we can't see
that. So it drops right back to
magnitude 9 until the pulsation goes
through a full cycle back to the maximum
compact size with the higher
temperature. And we can see those
pulsations in this image to the right
here. But it's in addition to the 11
month pulsation, it undergoes outbursts
uh thermal pulses taking 10 years and
these occur at around about 10,000year
intervals and every time it does so
according to theory then the power
output of the whole star ratchets up one
notch and so gradually this is
accounting for it changing over time. I
think the image on the right is
fantastic with the small compact bright
orange center bottom right and the
distended cool cherry red uh top right
there. Again, you can see the size of it
compared to the Earth's
orbit. But we can use these myra
variables as steps on the cosmic
distance ladder. This lovely straight
line plot tells the story that we can
correlate the infrared light output. We
have to just look to see how much heat
is coming from the star and we get a
period versus luminosity correlation.
Actually a very good one. And so if we
know the period then we can infer the
true power output. And if we compare
that with the apparent brightness, then
we can use the standard candle rule that
if it's twice as far away, it'll be a
quarter as bright and work backwards to
get the distance. So we do this with
sephid variables very famously, but myra
variables are also turning out to be
very important and perhaps a little
easier because there are quite a lot of
them.
Now, it's estimated to be about six
billion years old, and that puts it
right at the end of its life. Within a
few million years, the outer layers will
have been ejected completely as shells
of gas forming a planetary nebula, and
it will leave us with the exposed white
dwarf.
Here's an image taken in ultraviolet
light and you can see a spur of material
being emitted by Myra A which is then
spiraling across
uh of course attracted by the gravity of
its companion Myra B the white dwarf.
Now, the the pair of stars together are
hurtling across the galaxy very fast,
130 kilometers/s of what's called
peculiar velocity. That's very rapid
indeed. So, it's probably been ejected
from a star cluster at some point in its
life. Of course, being so old, it's very
difficult to trace back exactly where
that has come from because things will
have been well stirred around the galaxy
in the intervening 6 billion years or
so. So, it's um actually a star with a
tail. It's creating a 13 lightyear long
wake in and you can see that in this
lovely photograph including at the head
on the right hand side there the bow
shock as it's pushing its way with its
gaseous envelope all hurtling along into
the interstellar medium. So this is a
star that looks like a comet. Uh quite
fascinating indeed. And you can even
look at the nature and the structure
within the tail there seeing the
elements that have been ejected the
carbon and oxygen made deep in the core
of the star uh being erupted and then
left behind on its journey. And you can
also study the pulsations because you
can see that this uh tail has gaps in
it. And so by looking very carefully at
that, we can infer the activity of the
star because it's written out rather
like tree rings for us in the structure
of the tail
there. Now I said we'd just talk about
myra B. This is only half an arcsec away
from myra A. So very difficult to
separate um in amateur telescopes around
about 70 to 100 astronomical units for
its orbit taking around 500 years to
complete a lap. So uh it's a very tight
orbit really although perhaps would
correspond to the outer reaches of the
Kiper belt uh if it was compared to our
solar system. Of course, it has to be
that far away because Myra A is so huge,
it would be swallowed by it. But they
are in quite close contact. And this
Hubble Space Telescope image shows Myra
A on the right emitting a whole lot of
material around it. And a disc of
material accreting onto Myra B. The uh
material that was shown in that spur in
the ultraviolet light is spiraling
across and into a disc around Myra B
that then falls onto the star. And you
can really see that in this picture,
which is an X-ray picture, a very very
hot gas, Myra A on the right, material
flowing from it over onto the white
dwarf on the left. this Chandra X-ray
telescope image. Now, that material
building up on a super on a type um on a
white dwarf can lead to a type 1A
supernova. And in this case, I think
that will probably take a very very long
time because Myra B is quite modest.
It's probably about.7 of a solar mass
and it would have to double that before
it was in danger of reaching the Chandra
Seca limit at which point white dwarfs
explode as type 1A
supernovi. But the mass transfer,
although very spectacularly shown here,
is currently likely to take around a
billion years or so before it manages to
add another.7 of a solar mass in terms
of uh the buildup of the white dwarf. So
I don't think we're in danger of this
exploding as a type 1A nearby anytime
soon. So thanks very much for listening.
I hope you've enjoyed that one about the
pair of stars that comprise the variable
star Myra, the miracle star.